What, um, Mr.
Hannah wasn't sure if he was gonna be able
to get in AIE on the Zoom.
He's joining. Are we
gonna have sound or we gonna have,
He's joining the Zoom. Mr.
Chair.
Uh, Mr. Hannah, you made it.
Can you hear me at all?
Oh, we're frozen. We're,
can you hear me?
This was, this was always going to be a,
a challenge, you know where
Hannah's coming in from?
Not the riverbank.
Can you, can you hear me at all?
Cromwell,
do you want to just take this, see how you go.
We we're not in public. Are we in public yet?
We're we're in public. We'll give it, we've got plenty
of time today so we can
Right, can can you?
No, it's not waving to me.
It's last two minutes.
No. Um, voicemail going through. No.
Well we have now, so it looks like
we've, um, we've landed.
So we, well, so we've got three of us on the committee here.
We've got myself, we've got,
I'm, uh, PA Trevor, I'm Paula Garcia from, um,
Auckland Newlen.
Uh, no. I'm Hamish Campbell with MP
for Ireland in Christchurch.
Hello, Hamish. How are you? Good, good.
And I'll just introduce myself.
I grew up in the Bullis, so, uh,
we're the real white beers, so, uh,
Well, you'll know what we're talking about then.
I have, I've, uh, I've been looking
forward to this one all week.
Oh, good. Right. Good
One. Okay, so
what we do, if you just talk to the highlights
of your, we've, we've read all your submissions
and I see you've just sent us a couple
of new submissions too, which reflecting on that.
But just give us the highlights of your, um, petition
and hopefully we've got 10 minutes
and leave some time for questions.
Okay. That'd be great. Right.
I've just started off, excuse me.
I'm a 74-year-old New Zealander with 34 years experience
of fishing on the mate river in Southborough.
The purpose of this appeal is
to reinstate our white back season back to where it was
because we are convinced is not in decline.
That was their reasoning for, to shortening the season
because they, there's a lot
of distinction against the ary fishing.
Not all New Zealanders, this has also been abused
by certain element.
Rock have an impossible task to police the fishery.
Yes, the seasons vary.
Uh, mother nature has a big hand in this.
2002, all rivers were in flood
after the first week in September
to the last week in October.
But when this happens, people upstream do not
have access to the sea.
Doesn't travel upstream very far in the flood.
2 25, same again, another nature in the pigs with flooding.
Most of the
does not allow the farmers to fish lambing,
sailing, et cetera.
Normally before tractor work begins, I would like to fish
outside the legal season.
This is my pre thing now for science
and survey purposes
to prove mate goes up the river all year round.
It's not in decline.
This exercise is to be supported and overseen by dock.
I proposed to fish three to four days, either side
of the full moon and most times,
um, twice a month.
Record, record weight and catches and then released.
I've also purchased an underwater camera
by people to fish all the main rivers in Southland, um,
and the west coast we're in touch with them,
the resident up there as well.
So we can cover most of the rivers,
especially for whitebait been sport, sport enjoyed
by all New Zealand from many generations.
We are very passionate about our fishery.
We return our season back to where it was.
Harmony may then return to our beloved pastime,
50 grandchildren.
The, the joint of our treasured school,
the new proposed dates, 15 August the 15th of November,
which is two weeks shorter than we originally had.
Thank you.
Alright, thank you. Now I'm gonna say something Trevor.
Your, your contention is that there's as much bait
around now as has ever been. Is that right?
That's right, yes. Now, have you been to the pub lately
during, um, white bait season?
Have you not have, have, have you not heard?
Most fishermen, most people if you ask them,
will say the bait's not there like it used to be.
Wouldn't that be true?
No, I, I need to dispute that.
Um, it, well, how far are you going back,
if you're going back to 50 sixties?
We've got 10 tenfold.
The number of fishermen out there catching mm-hmm.
Same number of base. Um, I, I don't, I do not believe
that it is in short supply.
Well, I, well, I, I've I okay say that,
but I'll just, um, put it to you
that there's not many people that fish, that don't
actually bemoan the fact that there's not the bait this year
that were last year or 10 years ago.
Would, would you not admit that that's generally a topic
of conversation or is
that people trying to protect their catch?
Um, possibly to some extent, yes.
It has been said that white boat is so liar,
but, you know, um, or very protective.
Um, but no, honestly I do not believe, um, for example,
this year, the last two years down south,
the rivers have flooded 90% of the time.
And, um, after the season, this season, for example,
on the 4th of November, there was a lot
of illegal fishing going on
because the ba was just there streaming up the
rivers mm-hmm.
Of West Coast people. There was massive numbers
and certainly was there, there was massive numbers going.
So we are definitely not in decline.
Alright. Okay. Um, other members of the committee?
Um, so Trevor, you are saying that, um,
it is the number of, uh, illegal,
uh, fishers that are, that are impacting the catch.
Uh, but the number of white ba the white big numbers
remain the same.
I would suggest they do remain the same.
Um, but the illegal fishing has only been more paramount
since we, since the season was shortened.
Okay. Before that we hardly got any, um, fishing
outside the season and talking to the dock staff.
They will, um, back us up on that.
They're concerned they can't police it now.
Um, there's all sorts of stuff.
The, um, Trevor, the science would say
otherwise that around the numbers, particularly
even not even given down to the fishing, given
to the breeding grounds, given the amount of
riverbank grasses where they lay their eggs is reduced.
Would you, would you concede that that the actual breeding,
the breeding grounds have diminished?
Um, over, over the years things have improved?
Um, tenfold, all south farmers have been made fence off, um,
10 feet of waterways or 10 meter might be of waterway.
That's protecting the grass for the breeding
because they, um, in Hui Bay
there is a moving ground, a mass
of 300 acre block here, which they have, uh, fenced off for,
um, off for the breeding.
All the national parks in the west coast are not allowed
to be fished and they, that's automatically shut off
for the white to go up there to so many come in.
Um, while back dock had a bit of, uh,
problems with sprays environment,
um, some of the water and that probably isn't,
but from what I can gather, that spray is um,
not the grasses that what they lay the eggs in.
Alright. And what about your own personal catches?
Have they remained pretty consistent over the years,
Over the years with conditions?
Yes, they have remained pretty much the same.
Um, the only difference is we're catch
because we were down there full-time now, back then, uh,
we were only weekend fishermen.
Um, so we've probably been consistent.
Um, this year we got 34, sorry,
we got 34 um, kilos this year we got 40.
Um, and the rivers were mostly in flood and not behind us.
There wasn't many fish being caught at all.
Alright. Okay.
Well if there's no other questions, well this is,
thanks for this Drew.
What, what we're gonna do now, obviously we've got
submissions from um, doc and various others.
We, we were gonna hear from you first, um, to decide
where we'll go from here.
So we then report back to parliament
with a recommendation or otherwise.
So, uh, appreciate your time.
Um, and uh, lucky we, uh, it's,
we're not waiting for a tide.
Oh, well, yes. Um, yeah, the,
The, the one thing, the one thing I would've
to have you on a little bit about is in your submission you
said there's four tides a day and we only fish two of them.
Well, we tend not to fish the low tides
anyway. Wouldn't that be fair?
Uh, the, we do fish certain spots thing prefer
to do the low tide
and um, when the tide turns, um,
when they finish fishing.
Alright. They fish the top
of the tide as well as the low tide.
Yeah, it's on the foot.
Alright. Okay.
Well look, thanks a lot and thanks for hanging in with the,
uh, with the, um, it
Okay. Well thank you
very much. I hope you give it some
very good thought and we appreciate it.
Thank, okay. Cheers. Thanks.